# Reddit Pocket Self-assessment

This was the first large portfolio project I executed. The objective was to build a Reddit Client using React and Redux. It was particularly difficult to get it started, as I had nothing but the boilerplate from create react app and a few directions provided by Codecademy. A lot of self-doubt arose and I was stuck for three whole days without being able to do anything. I just sat and stared at the boilerplate code, the Reddit’s JSON API shallow documentation and some React and Redux tutorials. It felt like there was a huge gap between what I had learned so far and what I could actually get done. Once you have to put so many concepts together simultaneously to execute something without any guidance, that’s when it gets hard.

The funny thing with self-doubt is that it’s completely useless. I realized that no matter what happened before or what would happen in the future regarding the project or even a career in development, all that doubt and insecurity was contributing to absolutely nothing. What I knew before, I knew. What I didn’t know, I did not know. And that’s it, we have to start from there; there’s no other way, there’s no magic solution. With that in mind, I also decided that I would challenge myself by not looking for clues anywhere: I would not peek into Codecademy’s solution project code; I’d not look at other leaner’s code to get insights on how to solve the problem’s I had to solve. I’d rely only on documentation, Google, tutorials and my own decisions and planning. No matter how hard it’d be, I knew that was the way to actually learn what I wanted to learn and to develop emotional maturity on handling software development problems and challenges.

So that was enough to get me started on a plan for the project. I was able to get out of that blank-page-staring state and put some words into a document about what I imagined for the project, what I wanted to accomplish and how I was planning to accomplish it. And once I started typing, I was able to slowly let go of all that doubt and it was being replaced with pure excitement. I sketched a wireframe for the application on both desktop and mobile views, I decided on a color palette for the design, I set out a plan for the React component’s hierarchy, read about project file structure organization, played around with Reddit’s API on the browser dev tool’s console. I was thrilled to begin.

After this rough beginning, the project took shape smoothly and I enjoyed every step of the way. I started by building the components with hardcoded data and focused only on the plain HTML (or JSX to be precise since it’s React) and the CSS. It was great to revisit some early concepts and to practice the use of semantic tags, attributes and CSS styles and tools like grid and flexbox. This phase took about 5-6 days and then I had the skeleton of the application ready. Then I started getting deep into the workings of Reddit’s JSON API. I analyzed the response objects it sent my way, which properties were useful for this project and how I would extract and lay it down for use in the application. This research also triggered me to revisit many of the documentation pages of React, Redux and React Router, which was great to consolidate my knowledge of these tools. In this step I realized that patience is essential: taking my time to read through documentation with an open and curious mind and understanding deeply the tools I'm using goes a long way, not only for this project but for everything. For the next 8-9 days I was focused on building the component’s slices, integrating the external data into the components, constantly debugging the code and making improvements and design/style decisions on the go as I got to better see the shape of the application.

On the last days of the project I faced a different challenge: the obsession with details and minor complex bugs. The application was pretty much done and completely functional, but I was not able to let go of the desire to make it absolutely perfect. Some complex issues like audio and video out of sync in some cases due to the way Reddit’s API deliver media files were bugging me; the alignment and size of text, media queries organization, icons and buttons placement, project file structure. I started questioning all those things and thinking on how I could improve them, how I could better organize components, what parts of the code I could abstract into new functions. That’s when I knew I had to call it: the project was ready for now. I mastered the basic concepts, laid out the foundation for deeper insights, tamed my insecurity and self-doubt. That’s more than enough, there’s no such thing as perfection in reality. Maybe in the near future I’ll revisit the project and try to add new features, maybe I’ll have more knowledge then and realize what I could have done differently and more efficiently. But I’ll definitely look back at any given time and recognize that it was a big achievement for me. Learning to congratulate myself on my accomplishments and seeing every step of the way, as well as how far I've come since the beginning: that’s the real lesson to carry with me in life.
